---
title: "Introduction"
layout: page
---


<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.flag.introduction"> class="introduction" </cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="summary" title="Chapter Summary"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="multiple-choice" title="Multiple Choice"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="true-false" title="True/False"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="matching" title="Matching"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="fill-in-the-blank" title="Fill in the Blank"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="short-answer" title="Short Answer"</cnx-pi>

<cnx-pi data-type="cnx.eoc">class="critical-thinking" title="Critical Thinking"</cnx-pi>

 ![Photo of Stanley Miller. Diagram of the Miller-Urey experiment. A flask of water (to simulate the ocean) is heated. This is connected via glass tubing in a closed loop to: a vacuum pup, a flask containing gases (water, methane, hydrogen, ammonia) and an electric spark (to stimulate lightning), and final to a condenser that cools the water. The cooled water contains organic compounds.](../resources/OSC_Microbio_07_00_splash.jpg "Scientist Stanley Miller (pictured) and Harold Urey demonstrated that organic compounds may have originated naturally from inorganic matter. The Miller-Urey experiment illustrated here simulated the effects of lightning on chemical compounds found in the earth&#x2019;s early atmosphere. The resulting reactions yielded amino acids, the chemical building blocks of proteins. (credit &#x201C;photo&#x201D;: modification of work by NASA; credit &#x201C;illustration&#x201D;: modification of work by Courtney Harrington)"){: #OSC_Microbio_07_00_splash}

The earth is estimated to be 4.6 billion years old, but for the first 2 billion years, the atmosphere lacked oxygen, without which the earth could not support life as we know it. One hypothesis about how life emerged on earth involves the concept of a “primordial soup.” This idea proposes that life began in a body of water when metals and gases from the atmosphere combined with a source of energy, such as lightning or ultraviolet light, to form the carbon compounds that are the chemical building blocks of life. In 1952, Stanley **Miller**{: data-type="term" .no-emphasis} (1930–2007), a graduate student at the University of Chicago, and his professor Harold **Urey**{: data-type="term" .no-emphasis} (1893–1981), set out to confirm this hypothesis in a now-famous experiment. Miller and Urey combined what they believed to be the major components of the earth’s early atmosphere—water (H<sub>2</sub>O), methane (CH<sub>4</sub>), hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>), and ammonia (NH<sub>3</sub>)—and sealed them in a sterile flask. Next, they heated the flask to produce water vapor and passed electric sparks through the mixture to mimic lightning in the atmosphere ([\[link\]](#OSC_Microbio_07_00_splash)). When they analyzed the contents of the flask a week later, they found amino acids, the structural units of proteins—molecules essential to the function of all organisms.

